if you could implant in the minds of the
good majority of people on this planet a
single idea what would that idea be
I think it's got to be the idea of
optimism that all Evils are due to lack
of knowledge
wait wait wait wait wait wait wait wait
wait wait wait wait wait wait yes you so
you just give a definition of optimism
there that is not what most people think
of as optimism most people think of
optimism as a feeling of Hope about the
future your definition is different
because so explain that well well hope
that isn't based on an explanatory
theory is rather I mean isn't it isn't
that what they call a vain hope yeah
it's it's whistling in the dark the
optimism as I Define it has to do with
knowledge it's not a prediction of the
future it's an explanation of failure if
you explain failure as being inevitable
or due to some malevolent Force
insuperable malevolent force or uh just
the way things are
then that's a recipe for stasis which is
the recipe for failure and eventually
death therefore I think that all failure
has to be explained in the form the
reason we didn't succeed is that we
didn't know how to
and the knowledge of how to
is in principle attainable we don't have
it now but we could have it in the
future if we do the right thing
in fact it follows from this whole
conception of knowledge that we've been
talking about all this time that
optimism has to be true otherwise there
would be a limitation which would mean
the Supernatural and all that stuff the
arguments are watertight all the way
from the scientific worldview to
optimism in my view so here's here's how
I
would distill this David Deutsche world
view which I have to say David I I find
quite an inspiring world view so so here
we are this Homo Sapien you know we've
we've had this um surprising moment of
liftoff where we're able to create new
knowledge new understanding but it's a
fragile thing it's full of Errors full
of mistakes yes yes if we could Inspire
everyone out there to adopt the mindset
that knowledge was precious and that
when things go wrong on our planet it's
not because there's some evil force
there that needs punching in the gut and
and uh spitting at it's it's just
because we we we're not understanding
something and and our job and our duty
is to seek to understand to look for
those errors to correct them and if we
were to adopt that mindset then
um there's there's literally no limit to
the journey that we can go on together a
journey of growing knowledge and
unlimited creativity
um and uh kind of like lives of Wonder
and so forth I mean that's that's what I
take from you that knowledge is not a
thing for schools libraries or whatever
it's this
superpower that humans have developed if
they're willing to look at it the right
way well put I agree and we must also
expect to make lots of mistakes
so indeed it's not just you know but
just just knowing
that the problem is to create the
knowledge doesn't mean there's not an
automatic way of creating it in fact
it's conjectural we're going to make
many mistakes that's why we have to set
up institutions that can correct them
and so mistakes should be viewed as as
gifts in a way as long as you learn from
them and adjust as a result of them
they're a gift yes yes John Wheeler said
that our whole problem is to make the
mistakes as fast as possible